#mixing 
As we discussed in the previous chapter, the low-end relationship between the bass guitar and the kick drum is one of the most fundamentally important relationships in your mix. The goal is to have the low end feel both powerful and moving without crowding either instrument or forcing one out of the way of the other. A rule of thumb for EQ’ing the bass/kick combo is to decide which one wins the low end battle. Is your bassist rounding out that bottom end with a rich tone and some serious low notes while the kick drum is more ‘snappy’ and ‘clicky?’ Or is it your kick drum that rules the roost with deep, sustained sound? Perhaps it was even recorded through a sub kick. The choice is stylistic, and it’s really up to you.

Whichever instrument you decide is going to drive the low-end, ‘wrap’ the other instrument around it with its EQ. For example, if your kick is emphasized at 80Hz, make sure your bass is not emphasized at 80Hz, but rather at 40Hz and 120Hz. You may well decide to change this relationship as you start to introduce other elements in your mix, but don’t be discouraged by that. Revisions are a normal and expected part of the process!

Between 2–5kHz is a good mid-range area to boost in order to help a bass poke through a dense mix. This 2–5kHz area is where the upper harmonics that more easily identify the bass tone and pitch are located.

Some harmonic distortion can also help enhance frequencies in this area. As a general rule, adding
tube-style distortions will thicken up the low end of a bass guitar, while adding tape-style distortions will introduce harmonic distortion that will be more noticeable in the mid to higher ends. So tape-style distortion is advised for brightening up the 2–5kHz area.

Whatever EQ and distortion you add, keep bypassing and un-bypassing your settings to make sure you’re able to really hear—not just see—the changes you make. Our eyes can often fool us into thinking we hear the change occurring, so it’s important to listen carefully.
Bass compression can vary depending on how the instrument is played. If it’s an upright bass, then subtle to moderate compression with a moderate attack and release time is best.
If an electric bass is played with a pick or “funk style” with a thumb, faster attack and release times may be necessary to tame the transients. For finger style electric, those attack and release times can go back to moderate. These ratios often vary between 3:1 to 6:1 but can go as high as 10:1. The important thing here is to note how much gain reduction is occurring. Subtle gain reduction would result in the peaks being attenuated by approximately 2-3dB, where moderate reduction would be close to 6db. Make sure to apply makeup gain, or auto-gain, if your tool has such a feature. Otherwise, your bass will be getting smoother, but also quieter, which can cause it to get lost in a mix.

Another useful tool for separating kick and bass is side-chain compression. This form of compression uses one instrument’s level over a threshold to activate the gain reduction (compression) on another instrument. For example, inserting a compressor on a bass track that reacts to the kick drum will compress the bass every time the kick drum is hit. This method will ‘tame’ the bass track and ‘duck’ it out of the way each time the kick is hit, while still maintaining its overall level in the mix.

Of course, while looking at meters can be important, it’s equally as important to trust your ears. Until you do, know you can always reference your meters. Don’t be discouraged if it takes a while to get your low end to really shine—bass can be the most difficult instrument to manage in a mix. Unlike drums, bass is both a heavily rhythmic and harmonic instrument. While every kick drum hit is largely the same tone, the fundamental note on a bass changes for every note the bass player strikes, which makes nailing the low end on bass akin to hitting a moving target. If the bass part has a lot of movement, you may have to make adjustments using automation rides. Many mix engineers prefer to do this manually, but there are also plug-ins that automatically ride the gain or EQ of a performance within certain thresholds in order to smooth out a performance.
Once the rhythm section has been established, its time to bring in the harmonic instruments. The overall harmonic ranges and tones of these instruments can vary massively, from an ultra-clean and wide piano sound, to a screechy high-end guitar solo. Each presents their own unique challenges and characteristics.